.\" Copyright (C) 2013-17 Kevin Boone 
.\" Permission is granted to any individual or institution to use, copy, or
.\" redistribute this software so long as all of the original files are
.\" included, and that this copyright notice is retained.
.\"
.TH augrep 1 "June 2018"
.SH NAME
augrep \- search for text in metadata of audio files 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B augrep 
.RB [options]\ {pattern}\ {paths...} 
.PP

.SH EXAMPLE

.B augrep 
.RB -ir\ '\\\\\\\\bmozart\\\\\\\\b'\ audio 

Find files in the \fIaudio\fR directory and its subdirectories that contain
the whole word 'mozart', independent of case, in any metadata
 

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIaugrep\fR is simple utility for searching for regular expressions in the
metadata ('tags') of a range of audio files. Presently the utility supports
ID3v2 tags, Vorbis comments, and QuickTime 'meta' atoms; these tags are
found in MP3, Ogg, FLAC, AAC, M4A, and M4B files, among others. 
\fIaugrep\fR pays no attention to file extension -- all files are searched
for all recognized tagging schemes, regardless of name. 
\fIaugrep\fR may work on some video files as well, if they happen to
contain recognized tag frames, but it is not designed for that application. 

By default the utility displays the matching file, and any metadata
entries where the match occurred. It can search directories recursively
if required. 

.SH "MATCH PATTERN"

The pattern to match is a regular expression, optionally preceded by a
tag label and an equals sign:

\fIlabel=regex\fR

If no label is given, then all metadata elements are searched. 

The provided label is compared to the label that would be displayed. 
That is, unless
the '-n' switch is given, tags that are common to multiple file
formats (artist, album,...) are converted to human-readable, simplified
names. It is these names that are used in the comparison. So, when 
searching MP3 files with ID3v2 tags, the following commands are 
equivalent:

.B augrep 
.RB -ir\ -n\ tpe1=ummagumma\ audio 

.B augrep 
.RB -ir\ title=ummagumma\ audio 

However the second form, with "title=", will match a title tag in any
audio file that \fIaugrep\fR recognizes -- at least in principle.

The complication is that there is very little consistency in the way
that tags are used by different content creators and tools. So although,
for example, a FLAC file might use "TRACKNUMBER" to represent a track
number, it might also have "tracknumber" or "track" or "track number". 
MP3 files are usually more consistent about track number, but there is
no general agreement about how an "album artist" should be tagged. M4A/M4B
have a clear notion of how to specify and album artist, because of the
widespread use of Apple iTunes for files of this type; but these files
often have comments in the "lyr" (lyrics) tag, rather than the "cmt"
(comment) tag. And so on.

Consequently, the ability to restrict a search to a particular tag
is not always as useful as it should be.

The list of search labels that \fIshould\fR be common across tag
formats is: album, artist, album-artist, comment, composer, date, 
genre, title, track.
 

.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.BI -a,\-\-all
Include hidden files and directories (names starting with '.') in the search.
Note that a hidden file or directory will always be searched if it is specified
explicitly on the command line
.LP
.TP
.BI -f,\-\-file-only
Show only matching filenames, without reporting the actual metadata that 
matched 
.LP
.TP
.BI -h,\-\-help
Show brief usage 
.LP
.TP
.BI -i,\-\-ignore-case
Ignore the distinction between upper and lower-case text (so far
as possible)
.LP
.TP
.BI -l,\-\-log {0-4}
Set the level of logging, from 0 (none) to
4 (extremely detailed tracing). The default is 2 -- errors and warnings
.LP
.TP
.BI -n,\-\-no-remap
Do not attempt to re-map tag labels to their common names. So an ID3v2
track title field would be displayed as "TIT2" rather than "title".
.TP
.BI -r,\-\-recursive
Descend into directories. Note that specifying a single directory on
the command line without this switch will produce no results, as the
directory will not be expanded
.TP
.BI -R,\-\-dereference-recursive
Descend into directories, including those that are the target of symbolic
links. Without this swich, symbolic links are ignored, unless they
are specified explicitly in the comand line
.LP
.TP
.BI -v,\-\-version
Show version and copyright information
.LP

.SH NOTES

If output is to a terminal, \fIaugrep\fR will try to highlight matching
text in red. Only the first match is highlighed in any particular
metadata element. In addition, if matching metadata is displayed, the
matching filename will be highlighted in bold, to distinguish the
filename from the metadata.  

\fIaugrep\fR is case-sensitive by default. The \fI-i\fR switch enables
case-insensitive operation, but only for ASCII characters. There is no
support for Unicode case-insensitivity.

If the original meta-data specifies a text encoding, and that encoding
is not UTF-8, then \fIaugrep\fR will attempt to convert to UTF-8.

There is no uniformity in tag names across the different formats
this utility supports. In ID3v2 a track title is usually indicated
using the "TIT2" tag; Vorbis (Ogg, FLAC) uses "TITLE", while
M4A/M4B uses "nam". Where there is conceptual uniformity between the
different formats, \fIaugrep\fR displays a human-readable, common name;
so "TIT2", "TITLE", and "nam" are all rendered as "title".
This commonality includes album, artist, track, date, composer, and 
comment tags. If a tag is not in this set, the original label
is displayed.  

Be aware that audio files, even from reputable sources, are often badly
or inconsistently tagged. It is not at all unusual for tags that
are specified as UTF-8 to be encoded in some Windows-specific extended
ASCII, or for tags to be used for non-standard purposes. There isn't
much that \fIaugrep\fR can do to resolve problems like this. Sometimes
audio files contain multiple different tag blocks, in different formats.
In such cases, only the first one found is used. A bigger problem is that
ID3v2 contains so many defined tags, that content creators don't know
which ones to use. There are at least three different date tags
-- TYER, TRDA, TORY -- for example. When converting raw tag labels into
human-readable labels, only one of these can be converted. 

\fIaugrep\fR pays no attention to filename or extension, and will search
files that any human operator would immediately know are not audio.
This should not break the utility -- if it does, please log a bug --
but fruitless file examination still takes time. 

.SH RETURN VALUE

\fIaugrep\fR returns a zero status if the command-line is 
sufficiently well-formed to carry out a search, regardless whether
any matches are found.


.SH AUTHOR AND LEGAL
\fIaugrep\fR
is maintained by Kevin Boone, and is open source under the
terms of the GNU Public Licence, version 3.0. There is no warranty
of any kind.


.\" end of file
